# AI-DSL Roadmap for 2023 (Phase 3)

## Overview

Phase 1 and 2 were exploratory, mainly building an understanding of
how dependent types can be used to achieve autonomous AI services
composition.  Phase 3 will be all about putting this understanding
into practice to create an alpha or pre-alpha version of the AI-DSL.

## 2023 H1

The first step will be to build tools for releasing an Idris-based SDK
for the AI-DSL.  Such SDK will initially target the power user.  It
will contain an Idris library exposing existing AI services from the
SingularityNET market place.  Such library will be automatically
generated by crawling the market place and turning protobuf
specifications into Idris type signatures.  An offline AI-DSL Registry
of some sort.

For starter, the AI service formal descriptions will be reduced to
regular types, as that is what protobuf offers.  This should already
enable the user of the AI-DSL SDK to easily call and compose AI
services.  Such AI service compositions should then be publishable
back to the SingularityNET market place.  By extension, any AI
algorithms implemented in Idris, like the ones implemented during
phase 2, should be easily publishable to the market place as well.

The AI-DSL SDK could be tested on some of the service compositions
described in [Examples of SingularityNET AI Service
Assemblages](snet-service-assemblages.pdf) within the same folder,
such as the one converting English song to Chinese described in
Section 2.5, by spliting vocals and instruments, translating English
singing into Chinese and layering the result back onto the intruments.

## 2023 H2

Once this works as described, improvements could be made on the
following fronts.

1. Refine the protobuf-based specifications with Dependent Types.
   This may as well entail using an ontology, like SUMO, to replace
   general types like Bytes by more specialized types like Audio.

2. Integrate computational and financial cost in the formal
   specification, as well as performance evaluations and their
   compositional laws.

3. Improve Idris program synthesis to be geared towards
   composition-based synthesis involving a large number of functions.

4. Create a dedictated front-end language, the AI-DSL per se, as
   opposed to using Idris.  Such language could be especially good at
   representing composition, specifications, and designed to suit the
   regular user, not just the power user.

5. Make progress towards replacing the Idris back-end by, or
   complementing with, Hyperon/MeTTa.

Likely only one these items can be realized during the second half of
2023 though preparatory work can be done on all of them.
